---
kindle-sync:
  bookId: '30649'
  title: >-
    One Up: Creativity, Competition, and the Global Business of Video Games
    (English Edition)
  author: Joost van  Dreunen
  asin: B087NC6LS8
  lastAnnotatedDate: '2025-03-09'
  bookImageUrl: 'https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/71+Igkf047L._SY160.jpg'
  highlightsCount: 40
---
# One Up
## Metadata
* Author: [Joost van  Dreunen](https://www.amazon.comundefined)
* ASIN: B087NC6LS8
* ISBN: 0231197527
* Reference: https://www.amazon.com/dp/B087NC6LS8
* [Kindle link](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8)

## Highlights
Studying the business of video games is a fool’s errand. After spending the past two decades analyzing this industry from different angles and in different contexts, I’ve learned as much. For one, few people outside of this entertainment business will take you seriously. Even now, when seemingly every teenager in the world plays Fortnite and hordes of people armed with their smartphones scour their hometowns for digital Pokémon, many still regard video games as an odd phenomenon. Had I built a career around Shakespearean — location: [63](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=63) ^ref-60909

---
been considered intellectually exotic enough to be respected. But studying games? That’s just a waste of time. Worse yet, even people from inside the industry may treat you with disdain. As in many creative industries, the incessant presumption is that artists and designers create all the value. They are the anointed ones. The unfortunate fools who handle the business side of things are an inconvenient compromise — location: [68](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=68) ^ref-37275

---
necessary to reach a broader audience. Marketers are mercenaries, and the analysts and economists are soulless bean counters who add little magic. It is perhaps because of this circumstance that the average person’s understanding of the business of video games has remained rather limited. Few understand the industry’s inner workings at large, including many of the people whose very livelihood depends on it. In my day job as an industry analyst, for example, I deal with financial investors and hedge fund managers. I frequently am dumbfounded by the seemingly inverted relationship between the large amounts of money an investment fund commits to buying shares in publicly traded game companies and the lack of understanding of the business of interactive entertainment. Despite commanding billions in assets and the ability to move markets, insight into this creative industry among most investors tends to be rudimentary at best. In my role as a teacher at New York University’s Game Center and the Stern School of Business, I’ve repeatedly observed the tendency among aspiring creatives to sacrifice any financial expectations to see their creative vision become reality. All too often, when asked how they would fund their proposed game company, my students answered they’d just eat ramen for six months. This idealized notion of the bohemian creative is a common one. But it is also incredibly naive. The industry carries part of the blame: many of its professionals abhor conversations about money. They hold to — location: [71](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=71) ^ref-32246

---
In entertainment industries, we often simultaneously encounter an open derision for the business side and an irrational idolization of the creative process. A perfect game will sell itself, the argument goes. Consider, for instance, Eric Barone, the designer behind indie darling Stardew Valley, who said, “You can make a bunch of money by creating hype based off just saying stuff, and it works. But it’s just not my style. I don’t even like hype at all. I don’t want any hype. I would much rather create a great game, and I really truly believe that if you create the right game, and it’s a really good game, it’ll hype itself. It’ll market itself.”1 As if by magic, a marketplace will naturally become efficient: players will have no trouble finding content they enjoy, and companies may make some money or whatever, but we’ll worry about that later. Because that is how billion-dollar industries function, right? — location: [87](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=87) ^ref-43177

---
In the case of Stardew Valley, its creator was, of course, correct. Barone’s game sold over ten million copies and generated millions in revenues. But this fact conveniently overlooks the fact that Stardew Valley’s development was largely subsidized by Barone’s girlfriend, who despite being in school during most of the process was happy to support him and effectively shielded him from having any financial accountability. Behind every successful independent game designer stands a parent, friend, spouse, or sibling who helped out financially. And having a five-year period to pursue a creative vision is an ideal to many, but a reality to few. — location: [95](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=95) ^ref-63321

---
This is, of course, a controversial notion: that the myth of the lone, genius creator was just part of a deliberate business strategy. It forces us to consider a broader set of drivers that result in critical acclaim and commercial success. To be sure, talent is a critical component. But it is not the only thing that matters. Or, as famed designer Raph Koster proclaimed to a crowd of several hundred industry professionals and aspiring game makers: “being creative is not necessarily a unique virtue.”3 — location: [106](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=106) ^ref-28611

---
To understand how the games industry operates we must look beyond creative singularity and consider the industry’s overall structure and aggregate of activity. Creative firms do what they do in tandem with, or in reaction to, the world around them. As philosopher John Dewey put it in a description of art: “Life goes on in an environment; not merely in it but because of it, through interaction with it.”4 We can observe this from an aesthetic point of view. Graphic design, game design, narrative, and kinetic mastery all have something to say. How each ultimately manifests in a game is the result of a myriad of decisions. Similarly, games are seldom born in an economic vacuum and generally are the result of a series of purposeful decisions made by designers and business leaders. These decision-makers have a strong editorial influence on which features do and do not make it into a title’s final version. — location: [111](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=111) ^ref-58786

---
Ostensibly, they base their input on rational economic drivers, such as budget and available resources, but, as we’ll see, this isn’t necessarily the case. Historically, however, emphasis on the advancement of technological capability has dominated the business narrative about this industry. In a conversation between Nintendo icons Saturo Iwata and Shigeru Miyamoto on the early design for what ultimately would become Super Mario, the two discussed how the decision for Mario to wear overalls and white gloves, to have a moustache, and to don a hat was largely informed by the tension between too few available pixels and the desire to animate the character. Because of the technical limitations, the two designers improvised and arrived at the character most of us know so well today. In their words, because of the lack of pixels, the process of animating the character carried a “sense of inevitability.”5 But that does not explain how Nintendo brought the entire industry back to life in the wake of its collapse in 1983. It also does not explain how an innocuous development studio like Supercell managed to produce not just one but… — location: [118](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=118) ^ref-48403

---
Video games as an artform are influenced equally by business practices and by design decisions and technology. These business practices are poorly understood. I recall sitting in the audience at a conference thirteen years ago overhearing two executives talking about the new iPhone. The conversation went something like this: “Did you see the graphics on that new iPhone?” “Yeah, it’s on par with what you can get on a Game Boy.” “That’s amazing. What do you think people will pay for something like that?” “Well, if the… — location: [129](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=129) ^ref-50037

---
This, of course, proved to be spectacularly wrong. To a degree, such an initial assessment was sound: the limitations of hardware have long determined the form factor of game design. But it was not until Apple approved freemium titles two years after its initial introduction that the mobile category started to grow as spectacularly as it did. Instead of becoming a horseless carriage, it was a novel design and an accompanying business model that triggered the prosperity in… — location: [136](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=136) ^ref-36183

---
What I propose is to expand our understanding of this industry by taking into account the broader intercourse between game designers, producers, industry analysts, financiers, marketing specialists, and other decision-makers. They earn a living by busying themselves with the creation of interactive entertainment and accordingly shape the industry at large. This is a common line of inquiry elsewhere. We find a similarly intimate connection between business and film. In the early nineteenth century, for example, entrepreneurs behind the blooming film business quickly established that public viewing was more profitable than the “individualized-viewing regime” of peep-show machines. Allowing people to watch together and creating a spectacle around this experience proved to be a far more lucrative revenue model. Initially, business owners converted existing venues, such as music halls and fairgrounds, to meet demand. As the success proved to be sustainable, however, purpose-built cinemas quickly became… — location: [140](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=140) ^ref-64405

---
In this same vein, few mysteries remain about the workings of the music industry and how its economics shape the content it produces. A recent work by Princeton economist Alan Krueger explores the degree to which musical artists are subject to economic constraints. Despite the digitization of the music business in recent years, which resulted in a revitalization of its revenue, musicians have largely come to rely on live performances for their bread and butter. Streaming services, in contrast, serve mostly as a marketing vehicle to help popularize a song or an artist. In a product-based industry, concerts served to promote the sales of CDs. In the digital music business, streaming services serve to promote concert attendance. Moreover… — location: [150](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=150) ^ref-25136

---
This is logical because streaming services only pay royalties for music that is streamed for at least thirty seconds. In other words, economic incentives of streaming are directly affecting the way songs are written, composed, and performed.”7 Digitalization of the music industry has shifted its… — location: [156](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=156) ^ref-44388

---
Much of the success in the games industry has been the outcome of an effective exchange between a creative vision and an accompanying business model. Limits imposed by noncreatives are merely a design challenge—there is a financial maximum to how long a firm can keep the lights on before all creative effort stops. This limitation is on par with the technical restrictions that originate from material aspects like screen sizes and processing power. These form factors determine a priori what can and cannot be put into a game and historically have intimately shaped creative designs for content and consoles alike. The broader economics of the games business, however, are much less understood. How people think and make decisions in this industry is full of unexamined clichés. Perhaps because… — location: [160](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=160) ^ref-60654

---
This disparity presents us with the opportunity to explore the fascinating oscillation between mental inertia among creatives and executive decision-makers and moments of innovative brilliance. This book started as a compendium of data and business cases for my students. In the absence of a comprehensive body of work that covered the industry, I figured it would serve them well if I could put together rudimentary information on the industry and identify a handful of remarkable business cases in which companies spectacularly succeeded or failed. In adjacent markets like news, television, radio, film, and music, the effort of studying their respective economics is both common and understood to be of substantial influence on what audiences get from it. Video games do not enjoy the same degree of curiosity… — location: [167](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=167) ^ref-25384

---
In contrast, however, there is no shortage of books that cover the broad history of the games industry. Among the more notable titles are Game Over: How Nintendo Conquered the World; Super Mario: How Nintendo Conquered America; Console Wars: Sega, Nintendo, and the Battle That Defined a Generation; and Game On! Video Game History from Pong and Pac-Man to Mario, Minecraft, and More.8 Most of this literature is lovingly written, often through a lens of nostalgia, and serves as a way to pay homage to a writer’s favorite company, console, or executive. It even presents the occasional nugget of insight on how this industry works (or at least how it used to) and how companies managed to outmaneuver each other. As such, I, too, have… — location: [174](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=174) ^ref-55353

---
handful of game journalists have written books on the working conditions or accomplishments of specific companies. Consider Schreier’s best-seller Blood, Sweat and Pixels, which offers a narrated account of the experiences of different developers and how they have navigated the stresses of working in this industry. Similarly, Dean Takahashi, VentureBeat’s most popular and prolific writer, produced two books on the development of the Xbox and Xbox 360.9 The text dovetails with the common technological nostalgia surrounding video games. The MIT Press Platform Studies book series leads this category with its discussion of specific console platforms, such as the Atari 2600.10 And… — location: [182](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=182) ^ref-1680

---
Another important text is Casey O’Donnell’s Developer’s Dilemma, which explores the tactical challenges in game development. O’Donnell convincingly shows how technical, conceptual, and social dynamics affect how game makers operate, but ultimately laments the “culture of secrecy” that makes this industry opaque to outsiders.12 The chronic absence of transparency in business practices ensures that companies repeatedly make the same mistakes, resulting in the growing need for more rigorous information and insight. Writing by financial analysts has proved far worse. Hal Vogel, an accomplished Wall Street analyst covering the entertainment business, releases regular updates to his 680-page book Entertainment Industry Economics (currently in its ninth edition). His section on video games barely covers a dozen pages.13 And Michael Pachter, the industry’s most famous analyst and its adult terrible, has unparalleled access to intimate company information and regular face time with senior executives. What ultimately limits financial analysts is the obvious fealty to financial cycles: by and large, their analyses and broader understanding of the industry focus on a handful of publicly traded organizations and their ability to impress shareholders during next quarter’s earnings. Consequently, a long-term perspective that captures the implication of digitalization and similar shifts in the economic principles goes missing. Finally, in academia, we find an abundance of books about interactive entertainment but preciously little on the underlying economics. Take, for instance, an extensive volume, such as The Routledge Companion to Video Game Studies.14 Counting no fewer than sixty chapters, the book covers many aspects relevant to video games, including race, ideology, artificial intelligence, art and aesthetics, sports, death, interactivity, media ecology, and masculinity. But it has exactly zero information on the economic circumstances that affect the design, development, marketing, and publishing of games. Several accounts have positioned video games within a broader cultural context and have delineated their shortcomings in catering to a broader and more diverse consumer base. Michael Newman’s Atari Age: The Emergence of Video Games in America chronicles the sociocultural ascension of interactive entertainment.15 Similarly, Carly Kocurek’s Coin-Operated… — location: [191](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=191) ^ref-48586

---
Video games have flourished as a topic of academic and pop-cultural inquiry. Writers from all corners of intellectual pursuit seemingly agree on the still largely undiscovered relevance of interactive entertainment as an entry point into the contemporary human condition. Consider, for instance, how Clifford Geertz’s writing on the meaning of cockfights managed to make obvious the intimate workings of Balinese culture. A common text among game scholars, it establishes the fundamental observation that games are a microcosm of the larger social, cultural, and economic universe in which people go about their daily lives. By providing a careful account of the illegal practice of having roosters fight each other, Geertz managed to uncover what the practice represents to its participants and spectators, how it helps establish social order, and the deeply irrational… — location: [226](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=226) ^ref-60604

---
Increasingly, literature and research surrounding video games delineates the need for “other forms of knowledge” and the necessity to dispel the industry’s persistent “culture of secrecy.”19 It argues that to work in the industry, “both developers and decision makers of video games should understand the entire [emphasis added] process of video game development.”20 Yet missing from this growing knowledge base is a rigorous, data-driven, and comprehensive business overview that describes its structural economics and explains how… — location: [234](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=234) ^ref-28699

---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The village that helped put this together consists of a number of people whom I deeply respect. I am grateful for my circle of industry friends because of their friendship, patience, and generosity in sharing their perspectives with me. They include (in alphabetical order) Jeroen Bouwman, Michael Cheung, Jayson Chi, Brian David-Marshal, Ben Decker, David Edwards, Eugene Evans, Ben Feder, Solomon Foshko, David Grijns, Bill Grosso, Lazlow Jones, Roland Lesterlin, Doug McCracken, Ashley McEnery, Chris Petrovic, Wilson Price, Fabien Rossini, Steven Sadin, Dan Sherman, Kris Soumas, Chelsea Stark, Derek Sutta, Rob Vawter, Matt Wang, and Michael Worosz. Their enthusiasm and energy for this industry has been a continued source of inspiration. Among my academic peers, I am fortunate to count a list of immensely prolific and clever people. They helped me construct the overarching framework presented here and put my thinking into a broader context. Jesper Juul was one of the reviewers of an early draft of the manuscript and was pivotal in helping me better understand what I was trying to say about casual gaming. Dmitri Williams’s 2002 article, “Structure and Competition in the U.S. Home Video Games Industry,” served as a starting point for much of the work you… — location: [241](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=241) ^ref-8555

---
In late 2015, Bobby Kotick, the CEO of one the world’s largest game publishers Activision Blizzard, told a journalist, “We now have 500 million players in 196 countries around the world. In the past, our business was largely concentrated around middle-class consumers who could afford $300 or $400 for a dedicated game console or $1,000 for a PC. Now, with the introduction of high-quality mobile devices, we’re looking at everybody being a consumer.”1 Kotick said this when asked why the maker of popular franchises Call of Duty and World of Warcraft had acquired the mobile publisher behind Candy Crush. To many, the acquisition was odd. By entertainment industry standards, the publisher had just spent a ludicrous amount of money. Activision Blizzard paid $5.9 billion for King Digital, which is more than what Disney paid for Marvel ($4.24 billion) or Lucasfilm ($4.05 billion).2 Despite several high-profile acquisitions in recent years, transactions of this size centered purely on acquiring content occur infrequently. Yet this purchase indicated a change in the firm’s strategy. Having long catered to audiences that play shooter and role-playing games, buying a mobile game maker was a deliberate move to reach a broader demographic. The rationale was based on a different idea about gamers and deviated from the existing stereotypes surrounding this audience. Finally, with a single pen stroke, one of the largest incumbent game makers in the world embraced and acknowledged the shift of the industry to digital. Activision Blizzard built its success largely on the traditional brick-and-mortar business. By moving into mobile, it instantly came to rely for a third of its revenues on a new model it knew little about: digitally distributed free-to-play titles. Why would a top industry firm make such a drastic move by spending so much to enter a territory that it barely knew? — location: [263](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=263) ^ref-39004

---
Contemporary interactive entertainment hardly resembles that from the time when the world was infatuated with Pac-Man and Mario Bros. Over the course of roughly three decades, video games had gradually transitioned from the fringes to become a mainstream form of entertainment. As Kotick pointed out, everyone is a gamer now. For most of its history, however, game makers had targeted a narrowly defined demographic. Aside from the stereotypical gamer who is between eighteen and thirty-four years old, plays shooters until late at night, lives in his parents’ basement, and is covered in bits of potato chip, publishers had successfully alienated everyone else. This approach had ensured that the category long remained a sideshow to other amusement markets. Among the broader, socially accepted activities of watching television, going to the movies, reading books, listening to music, and attending sports games and musical performances, video games were the odd one out. — location: [278](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=278) ^ref-48348

---
Today, however, this industry caters to a common crowd. In the summer of 2016, for example, thousands of Pokémon GO players took to the streets of every major metropolitan area around the world looking for Pokémon. News reports of the hordes of people in the streets playing together evidenced in broad daylight exactly how popular and widespread gaming had become. From Washington Square in New York to Shibuya Crossing in Tokyo, droves of players roamed the streets. This scenario presented many with a stark contrast of what they had thought the average gamer audience looked like. If Pokémon GO is the most obvious example of how widespread gaming has become, it is by no means the only one. Countless titles now draw audiences that run into the tens of millions of regular players, including Candy Crush… — location: [285](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=285) ^ref-33653

---
As games have grown in popularity, the category has transcended its traditional modes of reaching audiences and emerged as an entirely new cultural and economic phenomenon. In March 2018, a blue-haired live-streamer on Twitch named Ninja spent several hours playing a multiplayer shooter title called Fortnite with musical artist Drake. It resulted in a record number of concurrent viewers on the platform’s history and instantly propelled Ninja to become a household name. What followed was a series of appearances on television and social media for Ninja. For publisher Epic Games, it meant that Fortnite skyrocketed to become the world’s most popular title, generating $4 billion in its first two years and helping the firm raise an additional $1.25 billion in funding. Suddenly, Fortnite was everywhere. Not just as a game played by many but also in the form of its odd in-game dances as celebrities and athletes everywhere copied the dance moves in public. A far cry from the 1980s stereotypes, the games industry has come to occupy an entirely new cultural space. — location: [297](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=297) ^ref-51332

---
Video games are big business. But that is hardly the most interesting thing about them. What sets this industry apart is that its various value chain participants have managed to thrive in the face of sweeping changes in how amusement is delivered and consumed. Over the past fifteen years, video games have transitioned from the fringes of the entertainment business to become one of the biggest and fastest-growing segments during a period characterized by two developments in particular: the widespread adoption of consumer broadband and the popularization of smartphones. — location: [305](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=305) ^ref-20463

---
First, in both industrial and emerging economies, the number of people with access to fast internet has grown explosively in a relatively short period of time. Today, more than one billion people subscribe to a fixed broadband connection that provides download speeds greater than 256 kbit/seconds, and there are almost six billion mobile broadband subscriptions globally.3 This growth plays an important role in how creative content is produced and consumed. Removing the restrictions historically imposed by physical boundaries, such as geographic limitations, inventory management, and retail… — location: [309](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=309) ^ref-31618

---
Second, the popularization of smartphones has both greatly expanded the total addressable audience and reduced the number of intermediaries between creatives and consumers. The distribution of content through telecommunications infrastructure has profoundly changed how it is produced and consumed. Billions of people walking around with what is effectively a computer in their pocket means content creators can reach a much broader audience. Where previously games were burned onto a disc and distributed by retail channels, internet technology enables end users to directly… — location: [316](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=316) ^ref-6423

---
Size alone isn’t everything, of course. Because of their popularity, video games have emerged as a critical component to the businesses of many of today’s largest companies. Indeed, several of the world’s largest firms—Apple, Microsoft, Sony, Tencent—rely heavily on interactive entertainment for their success. Take Apple, for instance. According to its earnings reports it generated approximately $11 billion in 2018 revenues from mobile games. By comparison, its music services and iTunes combined made just over $7 billion (see table Int.2). After a somewhat-lukewarm relationship to the gaming business earlier in his career, founder Steve Jobs gleefully reported during the 2010 Apple event that his company had not “set out to compete with Nintendo or Sony on their PSP, but we are now a significant part of that market.”4 Since then, mobile titles have been a prominent feature in Apple’s annual showcase to promote the capabilities and graphics of every new generation of iPhones. — location: [329](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=329) ^ref-54065

---
Facebook and makes it the largest game publisher in the world today. It suffered a massive drop in share price value, however, when its government froze the mandatory approval process (to protect consumers, the Chinese government has to approve every title before release and generally is skeptical of the cultural merits of the sector). This freeze meant that Tencent missed out on revenues generated by a popular title like Fortnite right as it reached the pinnacle of its success. Finally, several other tech giants are looking to penetrate interactive entertainment. In late 2019, Google launched its cloud gaming service, Stadia, to capture market share and take on a more significant role as the industry transitions to a new distribution model. Facebook similarly invested in cloud gaming with the acquisition of PlayGiga, after already having invested billions in both virtual reality technology (with the acquisition of Oculus) and content creators like Beat Games. And Amazon has been developing its own gaming division: after establishing its Amazon Game Studio and acquiring Twitch, it has started to quietly develop its own cloud gaming service under the code name Project Tempo. — location: [354](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=354) ^ref-43510

---
Combined, these organizations generate $827 billion in revenue, and video games represent about 8 percent of this total. Interactive entertainment is a vital component to each of their business models and serves as a proxy for their overall performance. Their share prices rise or fall depending on how well they manage to convince investors and consumers alike that their games division is healthy (see table Int.2). — location: [363](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=363) ^ref-16984

---
This book reveals how video game companies have adapted to the changing economic foundation of the overall industry. After decades during which games were largely a physical, retail-based business, key economic activities like development, publishing, marketing, distribution, and monetization started to change following digitalization and the popularization of new technologies. This equally challenged and prompted creative firms to formulate innovative strategies and resulted in a drastic change in the industry’s overall competitive landscape. On the basis of an extensive data set combined with detailed case studies, I show that rather than relying solely on creative merit, critical and commercial success in video games is more often than not the result of formulating an innovative business strategy. Set against a background of the broader structural shift from a product-based… — location: [366](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=366) ^ref-2817

---
I argue that successful companies in interactive entertainment apply the same degree of creativity to strategy as to making video games. The intercourse between the growth of the industry in value, its broadening consumer base, and its digitalization present the key drivers of change that are reshaping its overall market landscape. In this context, I assess how the structure of the industry has shifted, how individual firms have adjusted to… — location: [374](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=374) ^ref-46570

---
Book Structure This book is organized in three parts. Each describes a different stage in the evolution of the business of video games. The analysis presented focuses on the practices observed from notable firms and how they capitalized on changes in the industry’s underlying economic principles. Part 1 offers an overview of the traditional business and looks at the challenges of the games-as-a-product model. It starts with a historical perspective to establish how different companies operate, followed by a discussion of how amusement in a broad sense has changed. Chapter 1, “Digitalization of Interactive Entertainment,” looks at the remnants of traditional, product-based entertainment publishing and the challenges music, film, and video game companies sought to overcome with varying degrees of success. Chapter 2, “Games Industry Basics,” describes in broad strokes how the traditional business has operated for… — location: [379](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=379) ^ref-7582

---
Next, a key discussion that has emerged as a result of the popularization of downloadable content and digital distribution is the changing role of the brick-and-mortar retailers. To that end, chapter 3, “Empire on the Edge of the Volcano,” offers an in-depth account of how GameStop became the world’s largest specialty games retailer and how it manages, or at least tries, to reinvent itself. It provides an overview of the retail business in key industrial economies and discusses how core strengths like customer education, promotion, and used game sales are being repurposed to suit the needs of a changing market. Part 2 categorizes the digital games business into core segments and explains their recent evolution. The underlying business model is games-as-a-service. This part emphasizes how mobile, console, and PC game companies have dealt with strategic challenges as economics shifted. Chapter 4, “Everyone Is a Gamer Now,” begins with a discussion of the ascension of video games to a mainstream form of entertainment. The rise of casual titles across mobile platforms and social networks has allowed the… — location: [389](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=389) ^ref-11168

---
Chapter 5, “Myth of the Mobile Millionaire,” examines the rapid rise of mobile gaming and explains how a company like Supercell managed to produce not one but four titles that generated more than a billion dollars in revenue. It looks specifically at how developers and publishers alike face the increasing costs of development and marketing even as worldwide demand for mobile games continues to grow in size. Chapter 6, “Greatly Exaggerated Death of the Console,” dispels the myth that dedicated gaming hardware is on its way out by outlining the strengths of organizations like Microsoft, Nintendo, and Sony. These companies… — location: [400](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=400) ^ref-12923

---
Chapter 7, “Glorious Return of PC Gaming,” examines how PC-based game development has persevered thanks to audience loyalty and the emergence of digital distribution. In addition to discussing the innovative genius that drives the success of an organization like Valve, the chapter explains how Blizzard came to dominate the online role-playing category and how a South Korean firm named Nexon managed to penetrate the U.S. market. In addition to its various merits, digitalization also presents a series of challenges to game companies. The abundance of available content as a result of digitalization presents a growing challenge for creative firms in connecting with consumers. Part 3 examines more recent innovative… — location: [407](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=407) ^ref-7390

---
Chapter 8, “Epic Quest for Intellectual Property,” explores the central role of licensing to the success of conventional titles. It presents an assessment of different companies looking to reduce the financial risk involved in development and publishing by relying on established franchises and brands, as many of these principles are employed by participants in digital games. Examples like Angry Birds, Madden NFL, and Pokémon GO provide key case studies in understanding the role licensing plays as publishers seek to innovate without alienating their existing customer base. Chapter 9, “Watching Other People Play Video Games, and Why,” takes on the topic of live streaming and the popularity of Twitch streamers and YouTubers. The practice of people watching other people play games, providing commentary and input along the way, is a relatively recent phenomenon, but it already has significant implications for the industry at large with regard to… — location: [414](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=414) ^ref-53036

---
This brings us to chapter 10, “Next-Gen Revenue Models,” which discusses the viability of new earnings models, including advertising and subscriptions. After several failed attempts to introduce ads into video games, the current size and diversity of its audience suggests there may yet be an opportunity for advertisers to play a significant role in the contemporary games industry. And as new technologies like cloud gaming emerge to disrupt the industry’s landscape once more, it… — location: [424](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=424) ^ref-14534

---
Empirical Procedure Throughout this work, I have tried to be transparent by relying on accessible data sources and common methodologies. To provide an analysis of the global industry and how it has changed over the years, I relied on a variety of data sources to illustrate the various relevant… — location: [429](kindle://book?action=open&asin=B087NC6LS8&location=429) ^ref-12901

---
